I want to hone in on the topic like Brad suggested about reductive stress in our obesity panel,
which you both were a part of.
I saw, Brad, you were smiling, you know, very happily when you heard Dr. Peat reference
reductive stress.
So I want you guys to unleash, but try as best as you can to make this accessible for
people who are a little new, but don't let it hold you back too much.
Go try to find the balance there.
Explain what is this reductive stress and how is this connected to PUFA and how is this
causing obesity?
Dr. Peat?
- The PUFA role is, part of it is just a physical chemical effect, how the fat molecule affects
the ionic balance of the cytoplasm and so on.
But the reductive stress link to the PUFA, a lot of it is through thyroid function and
estrogen, because PUFA in the bloodstream will activate estrogen while blocking thyroid.
Thyroid promotes an oxidative state, estrogen promotes a reductive state.
And so reductive stress goes with the ratio of estrogen to thyroid.
And the immediate triggers for the fat balance, a lot of people have assumed that something
interferes with the oxidation of fat causing obesity.
But in fact, fat people during exercise burn more fat than normal lean people.
Estrogen makes women burn a much higher proportion of fat than men burn relative to sugar metabolism,
creating a reductive state.
The synthesis of fat is increased while the oxidation is also increased.
And so simply the fact that people get fatter made a lot of people think it's failure to
oxidize fat, but actually the tendency or being pushed to oxidize fat, it's called the
Randle effect or the Randle cycle.
If you are forced to oxidize fat, which fat people do very well, women do better than
men, that turns off your ability to oxidize glucose.
And so it slows your actual oxidative consumption of oxygen and production of the oxidizing
balance and so reductive stress.
The Randle cycle is a way of seeing what is forcing you into that choice to use fat
for energy rather than glucose.
When you are using fat for energy, you're in a reductive condition by failing to oxidize
glucose.
And that reductive condition is part of what activates fatty acid synthase.
So you increase your production of fat, but not to a degree that compensates while you're
also increasing fat oxidation.
And that is also characteristic of cancer.
Cancer consumes lots of fat, ends up making people waste away with cachexia, but at the
same time, cancer activates the fatty acid synthase system.
And if you can stop the fatty acid synthase, you cure both cancer and obesity.
And that's under the control of the redox balance.
So Brad, how does that fit with what you think about with reductive stress and obesity and
try to translate this as best as you can?
Yeah, I think that's about right.
And I just want to, you know...
I don't mean that insultingly either.
I'm just trying, I'm not a specialist like you guys, so I'm trying to process this.
Right.
And I always, and this is something that I always struggle to sort of define succinctly.
You don't have to give us all the explanations, but give us a little bit of intermediation.
I'll give you a little bit of intermediation.
So our food, our food is, when we eat our food, it's in the reduced state.
So carbohydrate is mostly carbon connected to hydrogen, and it's also connected to oxygen.
And then fat is just carbon connected to hydrogen.
And those electrons that live between the carbon and the hydrogen, they would be happier
if, or at least the oxygen would be happier if they were connected to oxygen.
And so when we eat our food, it's fat, which is like just carbon and hydrogen.
But when we exhale it, it's CO2 and H2O.
So all those hydrogens have recombined with oxygen and all those carbons have recombined
with oxygen and that's how they leave.
So when carbon and hydrogen leave our body after, you know, after we "burn the fuel,"
it's very oxidized, but it comes into our body very reduced.
And so basically fuel calories are all in the reduced state.
And the whole point of our, you know, of our metabolism is we oxidize the reduced fuel
that we eat.
And so what happens is reductive stress in a cell sort of looks like a bit like the cell
has overeaten.
What you find, you have, you find too much things in the reduced state.
And this is, and this usually is stated in terms of intermediates.
So like, so the citric acid cycle or the TCA cycle or the Krebs cycle, depending on what
you want to call it, is really at the heart of our metabolism.
And it's this cycle, you know, it's usually drawn as a circle.
It doesn't really spin in a circle, but that doesn't matter.
Every time you go around the circle, you need three molecules of NAD+ which is oxidized.
It's oxidized NAD.
And it all gets converted to NADH.
And so for each like, you know, for each glucose, you need like six of these NAD+ in order to
oxidize the glucose.
For a fat molecule, you need way more.
I don't know.
It's a, it's a big number.
It's like you need 40 or something of these NAD+ to oxidize the fat.
And so it turns out that our metabolic rate is really limited by how much of this NAD+
that we have.
So the main way that we reconvert the NADH back to NAD+ is by burning calories.
So if you, you know, whatever, when we get up and we walk, our muscle cells in our legs
are burning calories.
And what's happening is the NADH is giving its electrons to the electron transport chain
that's making ATP.
We're burning that ATP.
And every time we're burning ATP, we're generating more NAD+.
But at some point, you know, if we're, if more fuel is coming into the cell than is
really required, if we're not exercising, that's when you can, that's when you can have
this buildup of things like NADH.
And when that happens, NAD+ drops.
And so, and you can have more of something called acetyl, acetyl CoA comes in.
Is this the same thing that Paul Saladino was explaining when he said the cells are
getting so fat, they're bursting from-
Well, that's later.
That's, that's once you've stored fat.
This is, this is sort of before that.
This is like what happened.
This is like, so, so all of our fuels, whether it's glucose, whether it's fat, whether it's
alcohol, they all get converted to acetyl CoA.
They really get converted to acetyl groups.
CoA just is sort of the chaperone.
But they all get converted in this CO, in this CO, acetyl CoA.
And the acetyl group has a bunch of these electrons and the electrons need to go somewhere,
right?
So it's really all about the flow of the electrons.
The acetyl group is just two carbons and like four hydrogens attached to it.
And so what you've got is you have a bunch of high energy electrons and they, those electrons
all need to somehow recombine with oxygen to make CO2 and H2O.
That's how they're going to leave the body.
And so what you have, if you have a bunch of these acetyl groups, if you have all of
these electrons and they need to somehow get out, right?
And so, so the body essentially has a choice.
How do we get rid of the electrons?
We can do one of two things.
We can either burn the electrons as, you know, as energy, as calories, we can do some kind
of thermogenesis or we can, just as Dr. Peat suggested, we can start converting them into
fat.
We can build them back into fat and we can store them.
Right.
And so, um, and so, you know, our metabolic rate within each cell, um, as calories come
in our mitochondria literally have a decision to make and they can either burn that fuel
or they can store that fuel.
And what determines that is the rate of reductive stress that the cell is in.
If the cell sees that there's a lot of NADH and not much NAD plus, and if there's a lot
of these, if there's a lot of this acetyl CoA around, which is basically, it's all fuel,
right?
The, the cell see the, the mitochondria sees fuel burning up both as NADH and as acetyl
CoA.
Now the cell is in reductive stress.
When that happens, the cell is going to make the decision.
We need to store this as fat because it's building up and we're not burning it fast
enough, right?
That's, that's what the, so the cell is monitoring this kind of reductive stress.
And so, okay, well, what, what is the thing that has changed?
Why did we not used to be in this reductive stress?
And now we are because we ate these vegetable oils.
Um, and what I believe it is, is there is a system in the mitochondria and it is, it's
sort of a detoxification system if you want to call it that, although that's not really
how I think of it.
Um, what it is, is saturated fat when we burn them in the mitochondria create a lot of reactive
oxygen species.
And what that means is, um, the electrons, instead of making ATP, they're just, they're,
they're, they're kicking out of the electron transport chain and they don't make it all
the way through.
And then what happens is they recombine with oxygen to form this thing called superoxide.
And superoxide is a reactive oxygen species.
It's a free radical and everyone thinks that it's bad, but the more that we learn about
it, we actually have this very efficient system in the mitochondria, which gets rid of the
kind of danger of it.
And this is done by something called glutathione, which a lot of people have probably heard
about it's called the body's master antioxidant.
Uh, the glutathione is our superoxide dismutase comes in first, it makes hydrogen peroxide.
Um, the hydrogen peroxide is very efficiently eliminated by glutathione.
And then glutathione reductase gives us a molecule of NADP plus in this other enzyme
called NNT converts that to NAD plus.
So what happens is for every, for every molecule of superoxide that is generated in the mitochondria
and goes through that pathway, we get an NAD plus back.
And so essentially the more, the faster that we can drive, because remember, reductive
stress is just too many electrons that haven't recombined with oxygen.
So every electron that comes out of the electron transport chain and create superoxide and
then is efficiently, you know, detoxified or whatever you want to call it by the body.
Well that's another electron that's like a, it's like a, it's like a pressure valve that
opens up and it's like, okay, well if there's too much energy in this cell, we open the
pressure valve, we just blow off some of the extra pressure.
And now we're no longer in reductive stress because those electrons can just flow straight
back to oxygen and it's all dealt with very efficiently.
And the problem is that the, the, the PUPA, when they go through the mitochondria, they
don't create as much input at complex two of the mitochondrial electron transport chain.
And that's what drives the, the, the ROS in the first place.
So my argument is that this thing that we've all been very scared of, this idea of creating
reactive oxygen species in the mitochondria sounds very scary, but when everything is
working correctly, when everything was the way that it used to be, that, that, that and
let me be very clear about the, the, the path of the pathway of this, it's reactive oxygen
species and then it's superoxide dismutase and that makes it into hydrogen peroxide.
Glutathione turns the hydrogen peroxide into water and then glutathione peroxidase or sorry,
glutathione reductase gives us an NADP plus back and then NADP plus swaps the NADP plus
into NAD plus.
And that NAD plus is what allows our metabolism to just keep on cranking.
And so that system of, of getting rid of the reactive oxygen species is actually, that's
the top gear of our metabolism and the PUPA eliminates it.
And everybody's like, well, PUPA are great because they eliminate, you know, when we,
when we oxidize PUPA in our mitochondria, we're not making as many reactive oxygen species.
And that's true.
We're not.
But the problem is that the reactive oxygen species actually are the fifth gear of our
metabolism.
You know, that's, that's what I think.
And that's what I think is ultimately the problem with the PUPA.
The alternative to all of that though is to oxidize more glucose and the medical doctrine
about diabetes has totally deranged, made it impossible for them to understand what
reductive stress is.
They say that eating too much sugar can cause reductive stress.
And they say, it seems that the people who are making lactic acid showing excess reduction
are doing it because they have high glucose.
They put the blame on glucose rather than seeing it's the oxidation of fats blocking
the inter-annual cycle effect, blocking the ability to oxidize glucose to carbon dioxide.
And if you think of the meaning of oxygen where the concept came from, it means acid
source, oxy acid and tin.
And oxygen is recognized as the acidifier of the cytoplasm.
And the cytoplasm is alive when it's acidic.
The living state depends on oxygen creating a constant acid tension, in effect a deficiency
of electrons.
Basically by the presence of carbon dioxide attaching to the protein water system of the
cell, oxygen making carbon dioxide acidifies the cell and sustains life.
The diabetes theory gets it exactly backwards seeing glucose as a reductant.
Glucose is the source of our basic acidifier.
If you can keep your glucose oxidation up, you are decreasing the formation of fat.
The reduction condition produced by a deficiency of carbon dioxide from lower glucose consumption
that the deficiency of carbon dioxide is what turns on the fatty acid synthesis and turns
on the production of fat even when we should be using the energy rather than storing it
as fat.
That is where the reductive imbalance becomes obvious with oxidation of glucose to carbon
dioxide decreasing the oxidative state of the cytoplasm or favoring a reductive state
of the cytoplasm.
And that's why breathing carbon dioxide is therapeutic in so many ways, anti-inflammatory,
pro-respiratory.
Dr. Peat, what was the thing that you said turns on the fatty acid synthase?
A reductive state.
One of the functions, how the sick cell is seeing it, is like age pigment production.
The process of making fat is one way of disposing of the free electrons, keeping the cell acidified
to the degree that lets it go on living.
The production of fat becomes an electron sink, so it's defensive but with a lot of
bad consequences.
Yeah, I mean, I think I agree with most of what you're saying.
I do have this question, I think, which is what in your opinion would be the difference
between me eating bread with butter versus bread with soybean oil?
How does the bread with soybean oil lead to reductive stress versus the bread with butter?
Probably the major, both immediate and long-range effects are to block thyroid function and
activate estrogen function.
That happens right in the bloodstream as you're absorbing the fat.
It turns several switches all in the wrong direction.
Yeah, I mean, I don't know that much about how estrogen works, but it's very interesting.
So Brad, can you help me understand?
It sounds like you guys are both saying high PUFA diet causes this reductive stress problem
in the cells, which leads to obesity, but there's a little bit of difference in how
this works for both of you?
I don't understand it.
Yeah, I mean, I believe that we're both, I mean, we are both very much on the same page
with the idea that reductive stress is a buildup of molecules in the reduced state.
The example molecule that I mentioned was NADH, is the reduced version of NAD.
And so when the cell is in the reduced state, as Dr. Peat said, that raises the production
of fatty acid synthase, which I'm 100% in agreement with, absolute agreement.
So I think what we are both in agreement with is when the cell becomes too reduced, that
is when de novo lipogenesis happens, and that is when we start making fat from our food
rather than burning fat.
I think what we have differences in is perhaps what causes the reductive stress in the first
place when we eat polyunsaturated fat, and there's a good chance that we're actually
both correct.
We're talking about two different mechanisms, but as far as I know, they might be reinforcing
mechanisms.
I don't think there's any reason to think that one ...
So you're saying what?
Because Dr. Peat's saying it's estrogen, right?
Dr. Peat is saying that it has effects on, yes, estrogen and thyroid hormone.
And you're saying it's what?
I am suggesting that it actually has to do with this mitochondrial system of ROS, this
system of reactive oxygen species removal, which involves glutathione reductase and the
enzyme called NNT, both of which together, while removing reactive oxygen species, they
end up oxidizing the NADH back to NAD+.
So it's this kind of physical mechanism of oxidizing NADH and giving us back NAD+, with
the net result that the reactive oxygen species are eliminated.
If you increase your thyroid function, which increases oxidation of glucose and production
of CO2, the production of reactive oxygen species declines sharply as the oxygen consumption
increases, uncoupling to survive.
There's a good paper with that title.
The faster you run the electron transport chain, oxidizing all the way to oxygen, and
the mechanism is that that increases your CO2 production, and it simultaneously suppresses
reactive oxygen formation.
So the relatively quiet mitochondrion can be producing very toxic reactive oxygen species,
and if you can get it revved up with thyroid and glucose and CO2, that suppresses reactive
oxygen.
Right.
And I don't disagree with any of that.
And what I've seen is that, for instance, in a lot of mouse models, for instance, there
is a mouse model that sort of stimulates intense reductive stress, which is they've made a
knockout of the gene SIRT3.
And so, anyway, I don't want to go into the whole story of that, but those mice, as Dr.
Peat suggests, while they're on a high-starch diet, they burn tons of glucose, and they're
just fine.
But when they start to oxidize too much fat, that's when they get into problems, and that's
when you see fatty acid synthase spike.
And so I think that this ROS system that I'm talking about, and this ROS removal system
is very specific to when the animal is on a high-fat diet, or when the animal is actually
burning a lot of its own fat, presumably.
And I think that the ability to burn glucose is clearly good.
I mean, if you can burn glucose, that's great.
That's what healthy animals are supposed to be able to do.
And I think that's very clear that that's true in humans.
And it's more when we burn a high-fat diet, that's when we tend to see the reductive stress.
And so I think that the system that I'm talking about really is specific to the quality of
the fat that you're burning when you're burning fat, which I also agree with Dr. Peat that that
happens mostly, one, if you're eating a high-fat diet, but also if you're obese, you tend to
rely a lot more on that leg of your metabolism, which is burning fat.
And that is when you can get into more trouble with reductive stress.
And so I'm in 95% agreement, I think, with Dr. Peat.
Dr. Peat, what do you think of Brad's explanation of that specific mechanism that he's describing
for the—
I think it's right.
It looks like you're in 100% agreement, Brad.
Yeah.
It sounds that way.
So Brad has a specific—you're doing some experimentation to try to solve this obesity
problem using your own experimentation.
And I wanted to see if Dr. Peat can see if that's on the right path.
Would you mind sharing, Brad, with the class a little bit?
Yeah.
Well, yeah.
I mean, I actually—there is one that I'm actually very curious about Dr. Peat's specific
supplement that I've been thinking about.
And I suspect he's not going to like it, but I'll let him answer.
Dr. Peat, I've been looking at the supplement of lipoic acid, and the reason is that it
seems to oxidize NADH back to NAD+.
And I was wondering if that's something you're familiar with and/or had any thoughts
on.
No.
I don't know if it disposes of its electrons.
What's that?
How does it dispose of the electrons?
It seems like what happens—it has two cysteines that when you consume it are oxidized.
And within hours, the molecules are taken up into—well, it seems like it has, I believe,
a right-handed and left-handed version.
And one of them go into the mitochondria and the other go into the cytoplasm, and those
cysteines get reduced.
And then the body essentially eliminates the lipoic acid.
And so it's a naturally produced cofactor that is used in a bunch of human enzymes.
And so it's a human compound that seems like it behaves differently if used as a supplement
versus how the body creates it.
But essentially, you eat it in the oxidized form.
It relatively rapidly is reduced and then broken down and excreted.
Seems to be how it works.
It's a pretty long track record of having good evidence, both in mouse and human studies.
And it's something that I've been experimenting with.
I've read a lot about it, but I'm not sure how safe its disposal of the electrons is.
Right.
Yeah, I mean, it's like a lot of things.
There are certainly lots of questions about it.
But it does seem to be one of the few...
Why is he worried about the electrons?
Is that going to cause obesity?
Is that what Dr. Peat, you're saying?
He might cause obesity too?
No, no.
Just that anything that alters the cysteine and glutathione balance is likely to be harmful
more often than helpful.
In this case, it seems like it is specifically using the...
Well, yeah, it is oxidizing NADH back to NAD+.
Seems to be its primary mode of action.
And then that does sometimes have downstream effects on...
It actually tends to wind up with a more reduced glutathione pool, but it seems like its primary
mode of action is to oxidize NADH back to NAD+.
That should be good.
A test would be if you look at the resting lactate content of the blood, would a supplement
of lipoic acid lower that, indicating that it's affecting the whole system pretty much
in a constructive way?
Right.
Yeah, in my case, with a little lactate meter that I had, it did seem to do that.
But then I ran out of the test strips and I haven't been able to get more yet.
So in one small experiment, it seemed like it did that, but I need to repeat that.
But that's good because that's exactly the test that I was planning on using.
So I'm glad that you think that's maybe on the right track.
Brad, what about your sterculic oil, your tropical nut oil, and your succulinate or
whatever that is?
Succinate, yeah.
Well, succinate is one that I've been-- so this is, I think, this is very specific to
the idea of when we see obesity and when we see animals in torpor, they have down-regulated
activity of their mitochondrial complex 2.
Especially in torpor, that is one of the first things that is lowered as the animal goes
into torpor.
And so complex 2 is the very thing that is driving the system that I was talking about
with the ROS production and the glutathione reductase and the NNT.
And so to me, when I see that in obesity and in torpor animals, they're both lowering this
complex 2, I think, well, maybe we need to return that complex 2 activity.
And the first way that you do that is by getting out of reductive stress, because what happens
is in reductive stress is that complex 2 becomes acetylated.
So when I was saying that one of the things that builds up in reductive stress is this
acetyl coenzyme A, well, those acetyl groups actually will stop your-- it seems to be a
natural process.
This isn't done with an enzyme.
Those acetyl groups will literally stick on to your mitochondrial enzymes, and they'll
stop working.
So complex 1 that transfers electrons will just stop working.
Complex 2 will stop working.
And so pretty soon, all your mitochondrial enzymes are not working anymore.
And then you wonder, why am I not able to burn energy?
And it's like, oh, well, all my mitochondrial enzymes are turned off because I'm in reductive
stress.
And so the first step is to get out of reductive stress.
And that's why I've been thinking about things like lipoic acid to help.
And then once you've done that-- and you can do that.
You can perhaps do that with some intermittent fasting.
But once you've done that and gotten your mitochondrial enzymes working again, then
the best way to stimulate complex 2, which is the first thing to get turned off in TORPER,
is to give it its preferred fuel, which is the succinate.
And so what you see is that the difference between PUFA and saturated fat is PUFA has
less input to complex 2, and monounsaturated fat has less input to complex 2.
So the idea is that if you were to eat some unsaturated fat with succinate, you're sort
of mimicking as if you had eaten the saturated fat in the first place.
Now that is not going to fix the effects that Dr. Peat has suggested on estrogen and thyroid
hormone, but at least biochemically, it restores the balance of complex 1 and complex 2 inputs
that saturated fat would have at the mitochondrial entrance point, if that makes sense.
It was kind of a lot of jargon there, but-- Dr. Peat, does that succinate idea have any
resonance with your research?
Did I say the word right, succinate?
Succinate is what I said.
Yeah, it's a possibility.
Do you have another alternative recommendation for people trying to overcome the obesity
problem caused by this PUFA problem?
Starting with close attention to your thyroid and carbon dioxide levels, the fact that carbon
dioxide in itself will turn off the production of lactate shows that its action on the cytoplasm
in many different ways is restorative of the oxidative state.
The gaseous CO2 is a powerful acid, a Lewis acid, that binds to the proteins above other
things and in binding to the protein, it acidifies the protein and the whole cytoplasm, correcting
in an instantaneous way some of the reductive stress, simply retracting the electrons into
the system, making it more acidic.
Brad, what does that mean to you?
Can you explain?
You know, even I'm going to have to think about that one for a bit.
What does that mean in terms of a dietary intervention, though?
What is that, Dr. Peat?
Are you saying increase your carbohydrates to get rid of the obesity problem?
Yeah.
You don't want to overload either on fat or protein because that can interfere with your
ability to oxidize enough glucose carbohydrate.
So you want to keep your protein moderate?
Is that what you're saying?
Yeah.
The ketogenic diet often is high protein among other things, but the ketogenic diet is powerfully
stressful, reductively, interfering with thyroid function and the consumption of electrons.
The concept of oxidation, if you start with St. Georgie and Gilbert Ling, the meaning
of oxidation looks very different from the standard medical thinking in terms of the
Brunstad-Lowry acid.
Their thinking is based on the Lewis acid approach.
The Lewis acid constitutes an acceptor of electrons and CO2 is a powerful acceptor of
a set of electrons.
In doing that, through an inductive effect, the affinity for electrons is transmitted
from the carbon dioxide through the adjoining parts of the protein chain.
And that's at the root of what reductive stress is doing wrong.
The CO2 acidifies the system, retracts electrons, makes them less reactive, less harmful.
And that goes back to the very beginning of the century with Moses Gomberg and his understanding.
He was the one that first produced a stable free radical.
One of his students was W.F. Koch who investigated the role of electron acceptors, powerful electron
acceptors, as therapeutic agents.
And that combination of thinking of Moses Gomberg and W.F. Koch was a powerful influence
on St. George and working more or less at the same time Gilbert Ling was applying the
same ideas of the long-range inducting effects of electron affinity agents, especially carbon
dioxide.
You know, Dr. Gabrielle Lyon, I was listening to her, she's a natural holistic doctor.
She has a concept called muscle-centric medicine that she believes you've got to really get
a lot of protein, especially animal protein, to improve your metabolism and ward off problems
like obesity.
It's all about gaining muscle.
She's very pro lots of protein, but you're saying protein is in the way here of solving
obesity?
Especially some of the amino acids that are anti-thyroid, anti-metabolic, and excitotoxic
amino acids, especially mesionine, cysteine, and tryptophan, but some of the other excitotoxins
like glutamate and aspartate contribute to the problem.
Once your growth slows down, then you should reduce the ratio of protein to carbohydrates.
So in your 20s and 30s, there should be a drastic cutback in the proportion of protein
to carbohydrates.
And that won't cause deterioration of muscle organs or whatever?
No, actually it helps.
If you look at restriction of just single amino acids, animal experiments found that
getting mesionine intake right down to the bare limit that you need for exchanging, for
renewing cells that are turning over, there's a certain amount that is required.
And anything beyond that begins to have anti-metabolic effects.
Just by restricting mesionine to that bare minimum, they got 40% lifespan extension in
animals.
And restricting other amino acids, you get great benefits, not necessarily as high as
40%.
Dr. Peat, I know that there is, well, I've read a few papers recently suggesting that
branched chain amino acids, at least high circulating levels of branched chain amino
acids, were very preferred for beginning new fat chains in de novo lipogenesis.
I believe this was specific to white adipose tissue, white fat.
Is that something you're familiar with or do you think it's similar to what you were
talking about?
Yeah, too much of several of the amino acids can derange things and turn your metabolism
upside down.
So you're suggesting that someone who's dealing with serious obesity should increase
their carbohydrate consumption, of course, avoid high poof of foods, and moderate their
protein consumption, is that correct?
Yes.
And does your prescription for obesity include lots of exercise of any type?
No, not especially.
And there's no fasting or anything?
No normal activity.
So is there specific carbohydrates you're suggesting for obesity that people eat to
lose weight that way?
No, anything that the digestive system works with.
Because it's indigestible, you don't want things that cause gas and discomfort.
I'm interested in exploring this.
I did carnivore for several months, nose-to-tail carnivore, Dr. Peat.
I was eating kidneys and liver and muscle meat, rib eyes, and that was it.
And I did it for months doing that, you know, testicle, everything.
I mean, I tried everything, pancreas.
And I lost a lot of weight, and I noticed how like I'd wake up, and it was like when
I woke up, it was like, bam, the lights came on, there was no grogginess.
Like when I eat a high-carb diet, and when I'm struggling with weight, and I'm trying
to eat a high-carb diet, I get groggy, I get brain fog.
So what you're saying is so, I mean, and I know you're saying the poofas are what's causing
that, but when someone's not eating poofa, you're saying to increase the carbohydrates.
But what was I experiencing?
I don't mean, I'm not asking you to get into my particular situation, but how come I was
finding energy and waking up fully alert when I was on a nose-to-tail carnivore diet?
The good thing about an all animal food diet is that it doesn't contain the lectins and
botanical toxins.
Plants being sedentary need chemical defenses.
And so even most of the plant materials that are good foods do contain anti-metabolic and
even toxic materials.
The poofa function in seeds, a lot of it looks like it's specifically aimed at blocking animal
digestion to defend the plant, making the seeds especially toxic.
But leaves are also among the most toxic parts of the plant.
They're essential for the plant's energy production and growth.
But the fruits are the lowest in defensive toxins.
And the fruit has to be pleasing to organisms to spread the seeds.
And the root vegetables often have useful antibiotics and lack the mammalian toxins
that above ground parts of the plant need.
So the root vegetables don't have to worry about grazers, but they are defensive against
fungus, bacteria, and worms.
And so they can improve our intestinal conditions by some antibiotic effects.
So would you be okay then, or would you recommend or be friendly with a nose-to-tail carnivore
diet that wasn't so heavy on muscle meats, but maybe you incorporate shellfish and liver
and other things we're going to get some of the carbohydrates from, or you think that's
not enough carbohydrates for a healthy long-term diet?
Yeah, I think for a relatively methionine and tryptophan-deficient diet is better than
the things you gain from a basically meat diet are digestibility and freedom from plant
toxins.
But still, you have the metabolic suppressive effect of the tryptophan.
Dr. Peat, what do you think of the idea that in a healthy person, and we see this all over
the world, that we should be burning a lot of carbohydrate and it's really good for you,
but in an obese person who has stored up a lifetime of polyunsaturated and monounsaturated
fat, if that person then immediately tries to switch to a high-carbohydrate diet, it
doesn't work because you're still going to have the reductive stress because any time
between meals, you're switching back to burning your own body fat, which is full of polyunsaturated
and monounsaturated fats.
Yeah, and keeping adequate glycogen stores is essential so that you don't have these
surges of PUFA coming out of your tissues.
And to store adequate glycogen, it not only requires carbohydrate in the diet, but a good
thyroid function.
And so to unload the PUFA safely, you need thyroid and glycogen to activate the liver's
detoxifying system.
When the liver is supported with its carbohydrate and thyroid, it can produce the detoxifying
glucuronidation and sulfation systems that will treat circulating PUFA as toxins.
And during the night, instead of circulating and poisoning your brain progressively because
your glucose drops during the night, creates lipolysis, the bad fatty acids equilibrate
into your brain, cause brain damage every night.
If you keep your carbohydrate and thyroid up in a good range, then your liver recognizes
those circulating PUFA molecules as toxins to be sulfated and glucuronidated for excretion
through the kidneys so you don't have to oxidize them.
Interesting.
So, you know, I want you to be right, Dr. Peate, because I want to eat ice cream and
stuff, but it hasn't worked out for me when I've done it.
So I got to figure out how to do that right, you know?
Some of the safest carbohydrates are orange juice and grape juice because those are high
in the flavonoids, which have the—inside the cell, they work as pro-oxidants.
What about—would you still recommend people avoid common, you know, wheat products when
they're in an obese state or overweight state like that?
If they have digestive reactions to them, yeah, bread, industrial bread is a big problem
because of the way it's made instead of traditional leavening, which broke down a
lot of the toxins.
The quick production methods leave a lot of the seed toxins in it.
Like you mentioned, white rice is a detoxified grain carbohydrate that is relatively safe.
So you would recommend that people just up their carbohydrate intake?
They don't have to add extra diet—I mean exercise regimen into your prescription for
obesity.
They just need to up their carbohydrate intake to how many carbs a day?
How many grams of carb are we talking about here?
Oh, there are lots of animal and human experiments showing that you can add hundreds of calories
of carbohydrate to a standard diet without increasing any fat storage because that moderate
amount of increased carbohydrate increases the metabolic rate by—usually the experiments
show a 20% increase in metabolic rate when you add a few hundred calories of carbohydrate
to a standard diet.
Dr. Peate, is there a study like that that you can remember off the top of your head
that would be a good one to read?
No.
Sorry, I don't mean to put you on the spot.
I know it's hard to remember these things.
I can rarely remember either.
So you're saying, like, are we talking like 500 carbs a day or what are we talking about
here?
Three or four hundred has been used in—
What did you say?
I'm sorry, I didn't hear you.
Three or four hundred calories extra.
What does that translate into grams of carbs?
I'm thinking about like packaging and stuff.
It's about a hundred grams.
Four hundred would be a hundred grams.
So he's saying eat a hundred carbs a day?
Is that what you're saying, Dr. Peat?
At least that.
That's still considered low carb by a lot of American standards, though.
I'm trying to understand.
Yeah, I think several hundred.
That's extra added to a standard diet.
He's saying that they've showed that if you take someone that's at weight balance at,
say, 2,500 calories a day on their normal diet, you can give them an additional 300
calories of pure carbs on top of that 2,500 without weight gain.
Yeah, that's been done in several different animal experiments as well as a few human
experiments.
So how do you burn all that toxic poof of fat that you've stored if you're obese?
You don't really want to burn it.
You want to support your liver so it can excrete it.
When you wake up with foamy urine in the morning, a lot of that is the poof that has been detoxified
and turned into a sulfate or a glucagonide with a soapy function so it goes into the
urine.
So you secrete the poof, you do not burn the poof.
That's the safe way to get rid of it.
Yeah.
And it takes several years once you stop eating high poof of foods, right?
Or no?
Yeah.
Typically, both animal and human experiments suggest four years for a complete turnover.
Wow.
So you just got to urinate it all away.
Is there another way to get out of it, to get rid of it?
That's what I've come across.
Oh, my goodness.
Wow.
Does that mean that if you're burning, so you're upping your carbohydrate intake and
then you don't have to add extra exercise or anything and then that will burn the fat,
the health weight.
You're burning, but how do you get rid of the fat if you're not burning it?
You're excreting it.
Okay, okay.
Yeah.
Wow.
And the thyroid is essential for liver detoxifying systems.
So just eating lots of carbohydrates, including table sugar, can help you lose weight.
Right.
It's been done experimentally.
But so everybody who's overeating carbs and gaining weight are doing it because they're
eating high poof of two, right?
Yeah.
Okay.
And Brad, you're saying, I don't agree, or at least not necessarily.
I'm not saying you're saying disagree, but you're saying that's not enough because if
you're dysfunctional from the high poof accumulation, you can't go straight to high carb because
that's why you're doing all your experiments.
Well, yeah.
I mean, this is the first time that I've heard the idea that we can eliminate the poof with
through urine and I'm, like I say, I'm not highly familiar with all of Dr. Peat's work.
So that's interesting to me.
It certainly had not been on my radar.
Brad, I'd rather drink orange juice than sterculic oil, if this is true.
Well, yeah.
And so I'm like, well, I mean, I don't know.
You know, that's interesting.
And so, but I do, here's what I do agree with that clearly metabolically healthy people
can consume an awful lot of carbohydrate without it being a long-term problem.
I think that's clear.
And I agree with Dr. Peat on that.
And I also think that, you know, when I said the average West Coast adult male, according
to the USDA was eating 5,000 calories a day in, you know, the 1930s.
And Dr. Peat said, well, in the 1950s in the Forest Service, I was eating 9,000 calories
a day.
You know, I think that was, I think that was fairly normal.
And you know, when I say things like that, everybody's like, no, that can't be possible.
I think, I think it's true.
You know, all of the evidence that we have suggests that it was true, but people don't
want, there's a sort of a vociferous, somehow that really like hits at people's core beliefs
and they don't like hearing that.
And then when we say, well, it's not really because of exercise.
And Dr. Peat just said, well, when I was eating 9,000 calories a day, I was just walking through
the woods and like placing small trees.
It wasn't particularly arduous work.
Sure.
I mean, I was walking around.
And I think that that-
Is that important, Dr. Peat, that you walk around a lot, even if it's brisk or not brisk
or whatever?
Yeah.
Just not feeling trapped in an office cubicle is a very de-stressing experience.
Just free movement is the important thing.
For how long a day?
Oh, well, people are sedentary mostly because they're trapped by circumstances.
If you have an opportunity to shoot baskets or play tennis or something, the fun of an
activity is what's important.
Is sunlight very important for this metabolic rate increase that you're talking about?
Oh, definitely.
Certainly sunlight and vitamin D support the metabolic rate to the extent that you can
correct obesity mostly by increasing a person's vitamin D and calcium intake as a very anti-obesity
action.
So, Dr. Peat, you're suggesting that Brad doesn't ... He's talking about this experimentation
of trying to stop this reductive stress problem caused by the high PUFA.
You're saying you don't need to have an intermediary stage where you introduce these other ... The
lipoic acid and the succinate and all that.
You don't need to do that.
You can go straight to high carb and up your carbohydrates, and you can burn ... You can
lose weight that way.
Yeah.
And you're saying that even table sugar for massively obese people or just go wild on
the table sugar can still help or no?
Well, it isn't nutritional in other ways, but a couple of my articles I write about
a French and an English doctor who found that they could cure diabetes very quickly by letting
people eat all of the sugar in addition to their beef and potato diet or whatever they
were eating.
And they often craved so much sugar that they would eat approaching a pound of sugar per
day as well as their other foods.
And after just a couple of weeks of doing that, they stopped wasting away.
People who were obviously going to die quickly from the wasting of diabetes, the wasting
stopped in a couple of weeks, and they recovered the ability to oxidize glucose and could go
back to a standard diet and go to work.
Well, how come people find benefit on diabetes doing ketosis though?
I've heard so many different stories of people doing carnivore or ketogenic diets and having
huge rebounding in health with diabetes, they report.
Is that two ways the skin of a cat or what's going on there?
What they call diabetes.
Many different things are called diabetes.
Diabetes was a classical insulin deficient type 1 diabetes where cachexia and death from
wasting are the very quick outcomes of classical diabetes.
And obesity has been called diabetes only because it involves high blood sugar.
It's a very different thing.
Okay I see what you're saying.
What about the argument that people in tradition, we were fat hunters, we evolved to eat, we
were eating these massive fatty animals and then later on even in more indigenous communities,
natives, tribes and so forth, they're always eating the organ meats and they're eating
these fatty animals and megafauna.
Does that not have any support for you?
I think that's bragging by hunters who exaggerated their hunting abilities.
I think the hunting gathering cultures really were basically living on the women's gathering
of roots and fruits and the men occasionally would have success hunting.
But I don't think that there's any anthropological reality to the hunter-meat-eater origin of
people.
I think we're descended from fruit-eating monkeys.
So you don't buy the whole mammoths went extinct because they were being driven into extinction
by all these archaic hunters going out.
No.
Okay, interesting.
But it's a very fascinating stuff.
Brad, any final thoughts or anything or questions?
Yeah, I mean, sorry, just getting over the flu.
Yeah, I mean, we went a lot of places there.
I think it's a good discussion.
I'm trying to think if there's anything in particular.
I mean, you know, I think that Dr. Peat and I are in broad agreement that the process
of this kind of reductive stress and this over—I don't want to say overgrowth, but
too much reduction, too much NADH and acetyl-CoA and all of these other reduced things in our
cells is at the root cause that is driving both de novo lipogenesis and also our inability
to efficiently use carbohydrates very broadly.
And I think that, you know, the reasons why—how these polyunsaturated fats are driving this
process and then also what are the most efficient ways to get back out of it once we're in
it, you know, I think this is going to be topics of much interest going forward.
And obviously, you know, I think Dr. Peat and I agree very broadly on the basics of
that core idea, and we have some disagreements on the edges, but, you know, that's okay,
obviously.
And I just think—I think that really is where a lot of interest should be happening,
and hopefully people are interested in this.
You know, I'll certainly be writing a lot about it at fireinabottle.net, and I just—I
think that's really on the cutting edge of where things are going.
And there's a lot of research right now—
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Brad, I would love to—I would—I want Dr. Peat to be right
because I would rather—you know, I mean—I mean, that's what I want to—is there any
way we could do an experiment?
I mean, you're always doing these self-experiments.
Is there any experimentation you could do to try what he's saying and then see versus
what you're doing and see what the market—
Dr. Braden Hickman: Yeah, perhaps.
I'm gonna—I'm gonna have to think about it after this for a little while, so—see
how we can—see how we can do this.
I don't know.
Like I said, this is the first time you're hearing it, it's the first time I'm hearing
it, so I need to—I need to puzzle through it a bit before I can say that for sure.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Dr. Peat, any thoughts you'd like to close with?
Dr. Peter Peterson: Nope.
I'm just gonna be reading some of St. George's work and Gilbert Ling's for a different
perspective on the meaning of—
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: I'm sorry.
There's some kind of noise interference.
Is that your thing, Brad?
I'm sorry.
Dr. Peter Peterson: For a different perspective on oxidation in the living system, St. George
and Gilbert Ling, I think, are always good sources.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Wow.
Well, very good.
I really appreciate your time, both of you.
And Dr. Peat, how can people join your newsletter?
Because I'm sure a lot of people would like to join your newsletter after this very interesting
discussion.
Dr. Peter Peterson: It's at raypeats Newsletter at gmail.com.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Okay, very good.
And Brad, yours is FireInABottle.net, right?
Dr. Peter Peterson: Yep.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Your blog.
Thank you both.
Thanks for following.
Dr. Peter Peterson: FireInABottle on Twitter, but yep.
FireInABottle.net is the best.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Okay.
FireInABottle on Twitter.
Thank you for—and Dr. Peat, thank you again for what you've done because what—you know,
regardless of whatever lingering debates there may be, you certainly seem to be a voice in
the wilderness about the high PUFA seed oil problem for many decades and you know, you're
like—were you lecturing before the 80s or did you start in the 80s lecturing, just to
clarify?
Dr. Peter Peterson: Oh, no.
I started right away in the 70s after finishing my PhD.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Thank you for doing that because you know, I think there's gonna
be a huge cascade of people coming online to these ideas.
So it's an idea whose time has come, as we say.
FireInABottle.net.
Dr. Peter Peterson.
Yeah.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Very good.
Thank you, guys.
FireInABottle.net.
Dr. Peter Peterson.
Alright.
Thank you.
Bye.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani: Bye.
[No speech detected]